storage: add manual storage network config guide (#197)
harvester/docs: docs/settings/storagenetwork/manual.md

---
sidebar_position: 1
sidebar_label: Manual Storage Network Configuration
title: ""
---

# Manual Storage Network Configuration 

This page describes the manual method to configure Longhorn Storage Network in Harvester.

## Prerequisite

1. Make sure that Harvester version is v1.1.0 or above.
2. Prepare physical interface networks for the storage network, and ensure the VLAN configuration on the external switch side is correct.
3. Create Network Config in Web UI with the physical interfaces that you expected for the storage network, and remember the `Cluster Network` field for the next step.
4. Prepare an IPv4 subnet range in the CIDR format. IP Range should be IPv4 CIDR format and 4 times the number of your cluster nodes. This IP range should not overlap with Kubernetes Cluster IPs and Pods IPs.

### Example Configuration

In the following configuration steps, we will use the below configurations for example.

Network Config:
- ClusterNetwork: test
- NICs
  - eth2
  - eth3

VLANs:
- Namespace: default
- Name: storagenetwork-1
- VLAN ID: 100

IP Range:

> - 192.168.0.0/24

Author: Currently, it will not be the parameters in the UI, it will be command line only in this version

## Configuration

### Step 1: Create VLANs

> - Create Cluster Networks/Configs in Web UI.
>     - Choose Networks > Cluster Networks/Configs in the left sidebar.
> - Create VLANs via kubectl command below with desired namespace, name, and VLAN ID, and keep the namespace and name for further configurations.
> - Put Name in name field.
> - Put Namespace in namespace field.
> - Put ClusterNetwork name with `-br` suffix in "bridge" field.
> - Put IP Range into `ipam.range` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create Cluster Networks/Configs in Web UI.
    - Choose **Networks > Cluster Networks/Configs** in the left sidebar.
- Create VLANs via kubectl command below with the desired namespace, name, and VLAN ID, and take note of the namespace and name for further configurations.
- Specify the name in the **Name** field.
- Specify the namespace in the **Namespace** field.
- Set **Bridge** to the ClusterNetwork name with the `-br` suffix.
- Set **IP Range** to `ipam.range`.
```

Reviewer: Not sure if I understand line 43-46 correctly. Please double-check.

Author: It should be ok, thanks for suggestions

:::caution

Don't remove the VLAN if Longhorn storage-network is still using that VLAN.

:::

```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
  annotations:
    storage-network.settings.harvesterhci.io: "true"
  name: storagenetwork-1
  namespace: default
spec:
  config: '{"cniVersion":"0.3.1","type":"bridge","dns":{},"bridge":"test-br","promiscMode":true,"vlan":100,"ipam":{"type":"whereabouts","range":"192.168.0.0/24"}}'
EOF
```

> ### Step 2: Shutdown All VMs
> 
> - Stop all VMs.
> - Check all VMs are off.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 2: Shut Down All VMs

- Stop all VMs.
- Check if all VMs are off.
```

    - `kubectl get -A vmi`
- You should not see any existing VMI.

### Step 3: Shutdown All Pods with Longhorn Volumes

:::caution

Please stop pods by order.

:::

#### Stop Rancher Monitoring

- Stop Rancher Monitoring.

```bash
kubectl patch -n fleet-local managedchart rancher-monitoring --type merge -p '{"spec":{"paused": true}}'
```

> - Check Rancher Monitoring paused is true.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check if Rancher Monitoring `paused` is true.
```

```bash
kubectl get -n fleet-local managedchart rancher-monitoring -o=jsonpath='{.spec.paused}'
```

#### Stop Grafana

- Stop Grafana.

```bash
kubectl patch -n cattle-monitoring-system deployments rancher-monitoring-grafana --type merge -p '{"spec":{"replicas": 0}}'
```

> - Check Deployment replicas are 0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check if Deployment `replicas` is 0.
```

```bash
kubectl get -n cattle-monitoring-system deployments rancher-monitoring-grafana -o=jsonpath='{.spec.replicas}'
```

#### Stop Prometheus

- Stop Prometheus.

```bash
kubectl patch -n cattle-monitoring-system prometheuses rancher-monitoring-prometheus --type merge -p '{"spec":{"replicas": 0}}'
```

> - Check Prometheus replicas is 0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check if Prometheus `replicas` is 0.
```

```bash
kubectl get -n cattle-monitoring-system prometheuses rancher-monitoring-prometheus -o=jsonpath='{.spec.replicas}'
```

#### Stop Harvester VM Import Controller

> - Check VM Import Controller is existing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check if VM Import Controller exists.
```

- If not, skip this step.

```bash
kubectl get -n harvester-system deployments harvester-harvester-vm-import-controller
```

> - If VM Import Controller is existing, please stop Harvester VM Import Controller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If VM Import Controller does not exist, please stop Harvester VM Import Controller.
```

Author: Do we need to change it to "exists"?

Reviewer: Yes please. Sorry I misread it.

Author: I fixed it because there is another error.
Thanks a lot

```bash
kubectl patch -n harvester-system deployments harvester-harvester-vm-import-controller --type merge -p '{"spec":{"replicas": 0}}'
```

> - Check Deployment replicas are 0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check if Deployment `replicas` is 0.
```

```bash
kubectl get -n harvester-system deployments harvester-harvester-vm-import-controller -o=jsonpath='{.spec.replicas}'
```

#### Stop Alertmanager

> - Check VM Import Controller is existing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check if VM Import Controller exists.
```

Author: fix

- If not, skip this step.

```bash
kubectl get -n cattle-monitoring-system alertmanager rancher-monitoring-alertmanager
```

> - If Alertmanager is existing, please stop Alertmanager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If Alertmanager exists, please stop Alertmanager.
```

```bash
kubectl patch -n cattle-monitoring-system alertmanager rancher-monitoring-alertmanager --type merge -p '{"spec":{"replicas": 0}}'
```

> - Check alertmanager replicas is 0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check if alertmanager `replicas` is 0.
```

```bash
kubectl get -n cattle-monitoring-system alertmanager rancher-monitoring-alertmanager -o=jsonpath='{.spec.replicas}'
```

> ### Step 4: Check all Longhorn Volumes are detached

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 4: Check if All Longhorn Volumes are Detached
```

> - Please check Longhorn Volumes states are detached.
> - If there is still any attached volume, please wait for some monents and re-check it again before doing the next step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check if Longhorn Volumes states are detached.
- If there is still any attached volume, please wait for a while and re-check it again before performing the next step.
```

```bash
kubectl get -A volume
```

> - You could check with the following command, and should get an empty result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You can check with the following command, and should get an empty output.
```

```bash
kubectl get -A volume | grep attached
```

### Step 5: Setup Longhorn Storage Network Setting

> - Set Longhorn storage-network settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Set Longhorn storage-network.
```

Author: We need to check Longhorn setting as well.

Author: Let me check about this.

Author: Here we need to "set" Longhorn setting.
So "set" is the correct one.
Thanks for notice.

Reviewer: Then the current sentence is OK for me~

```bash
kubectl patch -n longhorn-system settings.longhorn.io storage-network --type merge -p '{"value": "default/storagenetwork-1"}'
```

- Check Longhorn storage-network settings.

```bash
kubectl get -n longhorn-system settings.longhorn.io storage-network -o=jsonpath='{.value}'
```

### Step 6: Wait and Check Longhorn Pods

- Wait for longhorn Pods.
- Check Longhorn Pods.

```bash
kubectl get -n longhorn-system pods -l longhorn.io/component=instance-manager -o=jsonpath='{range .items[*]}{.metadata.annotations.k8s\.v1\.cni\.cncf\.io/networks}{"\n"}{end}'
```

> - Check all "interface" is "lhnet1".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check if all "interface" is "lhnet1".
```

### Step 7: Restart Pods

:::caution

Please start pods by order.

:::

#### Start Alertmanager

> - Check VM Import Controller is existing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check if VM Import Controller exists.
```

Author: fix

- If not, skip this step.

```bash
kubectl get -n cattle-monitoring-system alertmanager rancher-monitoring-alertmanager
```

> - If Alertmanager is existing, please start Alertmanager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If Alertmanager exists, please start Alertmanager.
```

```bash
kubectl patch -n cattle-monitoring-system alertmanager rancher-monitoring-alertmanager --type merge -p '{"spec":{"replicas": 1}}'
```

> - Check alertmanager replicas is 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check if Alertmanager `replicas` is 1.
```

```bash
kubectl get -n cattle-monitoring-system alertmanager rancher-monitoring-alertmanager -o=jsonpath='{.spec.replicas}'
```

#### Start Harvester VM Import Controller

> - Check VM Import Controller is existing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check if VM Import Controller exists.
```

- If not, skip this step.

```bash
kubectl get -n harvester-system deployments harvester-harvester-vm-import-controller
```

> - If VM Import Controller is existing, please start Harvester VM Import Controller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If VM Import Controller exists, please start Harvester VM Import Controller.
```

```bash
kubectl patch -n harvester-system deployments harvester-harvester-vm-import-controller --type merge -p '{"spec":{"replicas": 1}}'
```

> - Check Deployment replicas is 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check if Deployment `replicas` is 1.
```

```bash
kubectl get -n harvester-system deployments harvester-harvester-vm-import-controller -o=jsonpath='{.spec.replicas}'
```
#### Start Prometheus

- Start Prometheus.

```bash
kubectl patch -n cattle-monitoring-system prometheuses rancher-monitoring-prometheus --type merge -p '{"spec":{"replicas": 1}}'
```

> - Check Prometheus replicas is 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check if Prometheus `replicas` is 1.
```

```bash
kubectl get -n cattle-monitoring-system prometheuses rancher-monitoring-prometheus -o=jsonpath='{.spec.replicas}'
```

#### Start Grafana

- Stop Grafana.

```bash
kubectl patch -n cattle-monitoring-system deployments rancher-monitoring-grafana --type merge -p '{"spec":{"replicas": 1}}'
```

> - Check Deployment replicas is 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check if Deployment `replicas` is 1.
```

```bash
kubectl get -n cattle-monitoring-system deployments rancher-monitoring-grafana -o=jsonpath='{.spec.replicas}'
```

#### Start Rancher Monitoring

- Stop Rancher Monitoring.

```bash
kubectl patch -n fleet-local managedchart rancher-monitoring --type merge -p '{"spec":{"paused": false}}'
```

> - Check Rancher Monitoring paused is true.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check if Rancher Monitoring `paused` is true.
```

```bash
kubectl get -n fleet-local managedchart rancher-monitoring -o=jsonpath='{.spec.paused}'
```

### Step 8: Restart all VMs

- Restart all your VMs.

### Step 9: Reset to Default (Optional)

- Follow Step 1 to 4.

> - Follow Step 5, and set the value to the empty string `""` in Longhorn storage-network setting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Follow Step 5, but set the value to `""` in Longhorn storage-network setting.
```

---
sidebar_position: 1
sidebar_label: Manual Storage Network Configuration
title: ""
---

# Manual Storage Network Configuration 

> This page describe the maunal method to configure Longhorn Storage Network in Harvester. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This page describes the manual method to configure Longhorn Storage Network in Harvester. 
```

Author: fix

## Prerequisite

1. Make sure that Harvester version is v1.1.0 or above.

> 2. Prepare phyical interfaces networks for the storage network, and make sure the VLAN configuration in the external switch side.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Prepare physical interface networks for the storage network, and ensure the VLAN configuration on the external switch side is correct.
```

Please use tools to scan the rest of the document and see if there are any obvious spelling issues.

Author: fix

3. Create Network Config in Web UI with the phyical interfaces that you expected for the storage network, and remember the `Cluster Network` field for the next step.
4. Prepare a IPv4 subnet range in the CIDR format. IP Range should be IPv4 CIDR format and 4 times the number of your cluster nodes. This IP range should not overlap with Kubernetes Cluster IPs and Pods IPs.

### Example Configuration

In the following configuration steps, we will use below configurations for example.

Network Config:
- ClusterNetwork: test
- NICs
  - eth2
  - eth3

VLANs:
- Namespace: default
- Name: storagenetwork-1
- VLAN ID: 100

IP Range:
- 192.168.0.0/24

## Configuration

### Step 1: Create VLANs

> - Create VLANs in Web UI with desired namespace, name, VLAN ID, Cluster Network, and keep the namespace and name for the further configurations

Reviewer 2: I suggest following [SUSE's doc guide](https://documentation.suse.com/style/current/single-html/docu_styleguide/#sec-list). A complete sentence in a list should end with a period. Would be nice to check the lists again.

Author: fix

- Put Name in name field
- Put Namespace in namespace field
- Put ClusterNetwork name with `-br` suffix in "bridge" field
- Put IP Range into `ipam.range` field

:::caution

Don't remove the VLAN if Longhorn storage-network is still using that VLAN

:::

```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
  annotations:
    storage-network.settings.harvesterhci.io: "true"
  name: storagenetwork-1
  namespace: default
spec:
  config: '{"cniVersion":"0.3.1","type":"bridge","dns":{},"bridge":"test-br","promiscMode":true,"vlan":100,"ipam":{"type":"whereabouts","range":"192.168.0.0/24"}}'
EOF
```

### Step 2: Shutdown All VMs

- Stop all VMs
- Check all VMs are off

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: Indent right.

Author: fix
